docs: add documentation to setup ceph dashboard monitoring stack (#8891)
rook/rook: Documentation/ceph-dashboard-monitoring.md

4. Node exporter: provides cluster nodes machine metrics to Prometheus
5. Prometheus Ceph manager module: provides Ceph cluster metrics to Prometheus  

## Prerequisites
- A working Ceph cluster deployed using the Rook operator.
- [Prometheus manager module must be enabled](https://docs.ceph.com/en/latest/mgr/prometheus/#enabling-prometheus-output)
- [Dashboard must be enabled](https://github.com/rook/rook/blob/{{ branchName }}/Documentation/ceph-dashboard.md#enable-the-ceph-dashboard) in the Ceph cluster CRD
- A PV with available space in order to store Grafana database (500Mb)
- The files with the different resources definition and configuration. You can get them from the Rook repository:
```console
$ git clone --single-branch --branch {{ branchName }} https://github.com/rook/rook.git
$ cd rook/cluster/examples/kubernetes/ceph/monitoring
```
## Prometheus Operator
Follow the instructions provided in [Prometheus Monitoring](https://github.com/rook/rook/blob/{{ branchName }}/Documentation/ceph-monitoring.md)

The Prometheus operator allows you to set up a Prometheus instance in you kubernetes cluster, a summary of the commands you will need to execute is below:

```console

> # Install the Prometheus Operator
> $ kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/coreos/prometheus-operator/v0.40.0/bundle.yaml
> 
> # Go to the folder where the different resource files for the monitoring stack are stored
> $ cd rook/cluster/examples/kubernetes/ceph/monitoring
> 
> # Create and configure the Prometheus instance 
> $ kubectl create -f service-monitor.yaml
> $ kubectl create -f prometheus.yaml
> $ kubectl create -f prometheus-service.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Install the Prometheus Operator
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/coreos/prometheus-operator/v0.40.0/bundle.yaml

# Go to the folder where the different resource files for the monitoring stack are stored
cd rook/cluster/examples/kubernetes/ceph/monitoring

# Create and configure the Prometheus instance 
kubectl create -f service-monitor.yaml
kubectl create -f prometheus.yaml
kubectl create -f prometheus-service.yaml
```

To verify that prometheus is running you can try to access the prometheus instance.

Execute:
```console
$ echo "http://$(kubectl -n rook-ceph -o jsonpath={.status.hostIP} get pod prometheus-rook-prometheus-0):30900"
http://192.168.122.70:30900
```
If you use the output URL in your browser, you should see the Prometheus monitoring website.

![Prometheus Monitoring Website](media/prometheus-monitor.png)

## Prometheus Ceph manager module
The source of the Ceph cluster metrics is this manager module, by default is enabled, and the Prometheus operator service monitor configures Prometheus to scrape data from it.

In order to avoid monitoring issues just verify that the scrape intervals are the same in Prometheus and in the Ceph manager module. Both intervals must be the same, depending on your monitoring needs, a value between 5 and 30 is correct.

In the Prometheus web UI, go to Status-Configuration, the scrape configuration should be like:

```console
scrape_configs:
- job_name: rook-ceph/rook-ceph-mgr/0
  honor_timestamps: true
  scrape_interval: 5s
```

> To verify this value in the Ceph Manager module, open a Ceph toolbox and execute:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To verify this value in the Ceph Manager module, open a [Rook toolbox](ceph-toolbox.md) and execute:
```
add a link to toolbox

```console

> [root@rook-ceph-tools-78cdfd976c-8xvgn /]# ceph config get mgr mgr/prometheus/scrape_interval

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ceph config get mgr mgr/prometheus/scrape_interval
```

30.000000
```

If you have a different value (as you can see in this example), you can change it executing:
```console

> [root@rook-ceph-tools-78cdfd976c-8xvgn /]# ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/scrape_interval 5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/scrape_interval 5
```

```

## Grafana

The Grafana image used is a customized image for Ceph. It is Grafana V.6.7.4, and it includes the set of Grafana dashboards used in the Ceph dashboard, and a couple of visualization plugins.

In order to deploy Grafana properly configured for Ceph, we will use the grafana.yaml file stored in the monitoring folder. Some modifications in this file could be needed: 

**1. Change of SSL certificates (optional)**

The grafana.yaml file includes a configmap for the SSL certificates used to enable secure access to the UI. These certificates are self-signed and if it is needed or preferred can be replaced by others.

**2. Grafana storage (mandatory)**

Grafana needs storage to save database and other stuff. The "grafana.yaml" file provided uses a PVC that get the storage from a PV based in a Storage Class with name "ceph-storage". The user must be sure that a PV using this storage class is available for the grafana PVC. Or change the storage class used in the grafana PVC to point the right one for your cluster. 

Verify you have a PV with enough space(at least 500Mb) available for the Grafana PVC:
```console

> $ kubectl get pv

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubectl get pv
```

> $ kubectl get pv
> NAME              CAPACITY   ACCESS MODES   RECLAIM POLICY   STATUS      CLAIM   STORAGECLASS   REASON   AGE
> ceph-pv-grafana   9Gi        RWO            Retain           Available           ceph-storage            5s
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```console
kubectl get pv
```
```console
NAME              CAPACITY   ACCESS MODES   RECLAIM POLICY   STATUS      CLAIM   STORAGECLASS   REASON   AGE
ceph-pv-grafana   9Gi        RWO            Retain           Available           ceph-storage            5s
```
```

keep command and their output different

**3. Modify the grafana.ini file to point the right Prometheus service URL (mandatory)**

Go to the monitoring folder (where the grafana.yaml file is located) and execute:
```console

> $ sed -i "s/PROMETHEUS-SVC/http:\/\/$(kubectl -n rook-ceph -o jsonpath={.status.hostIP} get pod prometheus-rook-prometheus-0):30900/g" grafana.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sed -i "s/PROMETHEUS-SVC/http:\/\/$(kubectl -n rook-ceph -o jsonpath={.status.hostIP} get pod prometheus-rook-prometheus-0):30900/g" grafana.yaml
```

```

Once we have updated the grafana ini file with the Prometheus URL, and we know that there is A PV with enough space available for Grafana, we can proceed to create the Grafana deployment and service:
```console

> $ kubectl create -f grafana.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubectl create -f grafana.yaml
```

```
To verify Grafana is up and running, just check deployments and services in the rook-ceph workspace. To access the web interface, execute:

```console

> $ echo "https://$(kubectl -n rook-ceph -o jsonpath='{.items[0].status.hostIP}' get pod --selector=app=grafana):32000"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
echo "https://$(kubectl -n rook-ceph -o jsonpath='{.items[0].status.hostIP}' get pod --selector=app=grafana):32000"
```

https://192.168.122.157:32000
```

Which will give you the url to use in your browser to see the Grafana UI.

![Grafana home page](media/grafana-home.png)

Once you have an instance of Grafana connected with Prometheus, you will need to connect Grafana with the Ceph Dashboard following the next steps: 

   1. In one of your Kubernetes nodes, obtain the grafana URL:

      ```console

>       $ echo "https://$(kubectl -n rook-ceph -o jsonpath='{.items[0].status.hostIP}' get pod --selector=app=grafana):32000"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      echo "https://$(kubectl -n rook-ceph -o jsonpath='{.items[0].status.hostIP}' get pod --selector=app=grafana):32000"
```

      https://192.168.122.157:32000
      ```

>    2. Open a Ceph toolbox and provide the Grafana URL to the Ceph Dashboard

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   2. Open a [Rook toolbox](ceph-toolbox.md)and provide the Grafana URL to the Ceph Dashboard
```
same add link to toolbox

      ```console

>       [root@rook-ceph-tools-78cdfd976c-8xvgn /]# ceph dashboard set-grafana-api-url https://192.168.122.157:32000

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      # ceph dashboard set-grafana-api-url https://192.168.122.157:32000
```
In general, we keep  `$` or `#` in front of command where we can't directly copy command and run. 
example:
In above command URL may be different sometime so we keep `$` or`# ` in front but for `kubectl get pv` we don't need to have `$` or `#` in front.

      Option GRAFANA_API_URL updated
      ```
   3. If you are using self-signed certificates for Grafana (this is the case by default unless you have changed them), you will need to set an additional Ceph dashboard property to avoid the certificate validation. Execute:

      ```console

>       [root@rook-ceph-tools-78cdfd976c-8xvgn /]# ceph dashboard set-grafana-api-ssl-verify False

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     ceph dashboard set-grafana-api-ssl-verify False
```

Get the Ceph Dashboard URL:

_Note: In this example it is supposed that [you have enabled external access to the ceph dashboard](https://github.com/rook/rook/blob/{{ branchName }}/Documentation/ceph-dashboard.md#node-port)._

```console
echo "https://$(kubectl get pod -l app=rook-ceph-mgr -n rook-ceph -o jsonpath='{.items[0].status.hostIP}'):$(kubectl get service rook-ceph-mgr-dashboard-external-https -n rook-ceph  -o jsonpath='{.spec.ports[0].nodePort}')"
https://192.168.122.142:32260
```

Open the Ceph Dashboard URL in your browser, [login](https://github.com/rook/rook/blob/{{ branchName }}/Documentation/ceph-dashboard.md#login-credentials) and navigate to "Cluster/Hosts", select the "overall performance" tab, and you should see something like:

![Grafana home page](media/ceph-dashboard-host-monitoring.png)

_Note: Until node exporter will be installed metrics about nodes will not be available (see alert manager section in this document)_ 

## Prometheus Node exporter

Metrics coming from the cluster nodes are recollected by Prometheus Node exporter, this application must be installed in all the cluster nodes and communicate properly with Prometheus server.

Execute:
```console

> # kubectl create -f node-exporter.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubectl create -f node-exporter.yaml
```

```

After that, you must have a new daemonset with the related pods running in your kubernetes cluster

```console

> $ kubectl create -f node-exporter.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubectl create -f node-exporter.yaml
```

daemonset.apps/node-exporter created

> $ kubectl get daemonset -n rook-ceph

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 kubectl get daemonset -n rook-ceph
```

NAME               DESIRED   CURRENT   READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   NODE SELECTOR   AGE
...
node-exporter      3         3         3       3            3           <none>          17s

> $ k get pod -l app.kubernetes.io/name=node-exporter -n rook-ceph

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubectl get pod -l app.kubernetes.io/name=node-exporter -n rook-ceph
```

and let's keep command and output in a different blocks. Thanks

NAME                  READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
node-exporter-4x4g2   1/1     Running   0          3m49s
node-exporter-w6gz8   1/1     Running   0          3m49s
node-exporter-xzfb5   1/1     Running   0          3m49s
```

Next step is to instruct the Prometheus server about how to scrape metrics from these pods, execute:

```console

> $ kubectl create secret generic additional-scrape-configs --from-file=prometheus-additional.yaml -oyaml -n rook-ceph > additional-scrape-configs.yaml
> $ kubectl create -f additional-scrape-configs.yaml
> $ kubectl patch prometheus rook-prometheus -n rook-ceph --type merge --patch "$(cat scrape-config-patch.yaml)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubectl create secret generic additional-scrape-configs --from-file=prometheus-additional.yaml -oyaml -n rook-ceph > additional-scrape-configs.yaml
kubectl create -f additional-scrape-configs.yaml
kubectl patch prometheus rook-prometheus -n rook-ceph --type merge --patch "$(cat scrape-config-patch.yaml)
```

```

Finally, just verify that the metrics coming from the cluster nodes are present in the Prometheus server.

```console
$ echo "http://$(kubectl -n rook-ceph -o jsonpath={.status.hostIP} get pod prometheus-rook-prometheus-0):30900/targets"
http://192.168.122.70:30900/targets
```

Type the URL returned in your internet browser, you should see something like:

![Grafana home page](media/prometheus_targets.png)

# Prometheus alert manager

In order to enable the complete set of alerting features provided by the Ceph dashboard, a Prometheus Alert Manager must be accessible.

Execute:
```console

> # kubectl create -f alert-manager.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubectl create -f alert-manager.yaml
```

configmap/alertmanager-config created
service/alertmanager created
deployment.apps/alertmanager created
```

You should be able now to connect with the alert manager using the following URL:

```console
$ echo "http://$(kubectl get pod -l app=alertmanager -n rook-ceph -o jsonpath={.items[0].status.hostIP}):$(kubectl get service alertmanager -n rook-ceph  -o jsonpath='{.spec.ports[0].nodePort}')"
http://192.168.122.70:31000
```
You will get something like:

![Alert manager home page](media/alert-manager.png)

Once deployed the Prometheus Alert Manager is needed to modify the Prometheus server configuration to point the new Alert manager.

Execute:
```console

> $ kubectl patch prometheus rook-prometheus -n rook-ceph --type merge --patch "$(cat alert-manager-patch.yaml)"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubectl patch prometheus rook-prometheus -n rook-ceph --type merge --patch "$(cat alert-manager-patch.yaml)"
```

```

Verify that the Prometheus Configuration is set, accessing the Prometehus server UI, go to "Status-configuration" you should see the reference to the alert manager in the configuration file:

```console
alertmanagers:
- kubernetes_sd_configs:
      - role: endpoints
        namespaces:
        names:
            - rook-ceph
```

The last step in the Prometheus alert manager configuration is to update a couple of Ceph dashboard settings:

- Get the alert manager URL:
```console
$ echo "http://$(kubectl get pod -l app=alertmanager -n rook-ceph -o jsonpath={.items[0].status.hostIP}):$(kubectl get service alertmanager -n rook-ceph  -o jsonpath='{.spec.ports[0].nodePort}')"
http://192.168.122.70:31000
```

> - Open a Ceph toolbox and configure the alert manager api host:
> 
> ```console
> [root@rook-ceph-tools-78cdfd976c-8xvgn /]# ceph dashboard set-alertmanager-api-host 'http://192.168.122.70:31000'
> Option ALERTMANAGER_API_HOST updated
> [root@rook-ceph-tools-78cdfd976c-8xvgn /]# ceph dashboard set-alertmanager-api-ssl-verify False
> Option ALERTMANAGER_API_SSL_VERIFY updated

Reviewer: same here link to the toolbox and keep each command different and their outpur
```suggestion
- Open a Ceph toolbox and configure the alert manager api host:

```console
ceph dashboard set-alertmanager-api-host 'http://192.168.122.70:31000'
Option ALERTMANAGER_API_HOST updated
```
```console
ceph dashboard set-alertmanager-api-ssl-verify False
Option ALERTMANAGER_API_SSL_VERIFY updated
```

```

Now if you open the Ceph dashboard and go to "cluster-monitoring" you should see:
![Ceph dashboard alerts](media/ceph-dashboard-alerts.png)

## Teardown

To clean up all the artifacts created by the Ceph dashboard monitoring walk-through, copy/paste the entire block below (note that errors about resources "not found" can be ignored):

```console

> $ kubectl delete -f alert-manager.yaml
> $ kubectl delete -f node-exporter.yaml
> $ kubectl delete -f grafana.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubectl delete -f alert-manager.yaml
kubectl delete -f node-exporter.yaml
kubectl delete -f grafana.yaml
```

```
_Note: This will cause that some parts in the Ceph Dashboard stop works (all the grafana charts and monitoring tab)_

The teardown of the Prometheus server is explained in the [Prometheus monitoring documentation](https://github.com/rook/rook/blob/{{ branchName }}/Documentation/ceph-monitoring.md). A brief summary of the commands to execute is:
```console
kubectl delete -f service-monitor.yaml
kubectl delete -f prometheus.yaml
kubectl delete -f prometheus-service.yaml
kubectl delete -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/coreos/prometheus-operator/v0.40.0/bundle.yaml
```

> 

Reviewer: remove extra lines. Thanks

```console
kubectl create secret generic additional-scrape-configs --from-file=prometheus-additional.yaml -oyaml -n rook-ceph > additional-scrape-configs.yaml
kubectl create -f additional-scrape-configs.yaml
kubectl patch prometheus rook-prometheus -n rook-ceph --type merge --patch "$(cat scrape-config-patch.yaml)
```

Finally, just verify that the metrics coming from the cluster nodes are present in the Prometheus server.

```console
echo "http://$(kubectl -n rook-ceph -o jsonpath={.status.hostIP} get pod prometheus-rook-prometheus-0):30900/targets"
```
>```
>http://192.168.122.70:30900/targets
>```

Type the URL returned in your internet browser, you should see something like:

![Grafana home page](media/prometheus_targets.png)

## Prometheus alert manager

In order to enable the complete set of alerting features provided by the Ceph dashboard, a Prometheus Alert Manager must be accessible.

Execute:
```console
kubectl create -f alert-manager.yaml
```
>```
>configmap/alertmanager-config created
>service/alertmanager created
>deployment.apps/alertmanager created
```

You should be able now to connect with the alert manager using the following URL:

```console

> echo "http://$(kubectl get pod -l app=alertmanager -n rook-ceph -o jsonpath={.items[0].status.hostIP}):$(kubectl get service alertmanager -n rook-ceph  -o jsonpath='{.spec.ports[0].nodePort}')"

Reviewer: ![Screenshot from 2021-10-04 12-06-52](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/34444611/135804698-aaef1d61-e678-4d29-9fe0-5102dce6584d.png)

Reviewer: when I opened the file two places are not rendering correctly with quotes. I have attached the screenshots.

FYI, in VS code there are extensions to review markdown files

Execute:
```console
kubectl patch prometheus rook-prometheus -n rook-ceph --type merge --patch "$(cat alert-manager-patch.yaml)"
```

Verify that the Prometheus Configuration is set, accessing the Prometehus server UI, go to "Status-configuration" you should see the reference to the alert manager in the configuration file:

```yaml
alertmanagers:
- kubernetes_sd_configs:
      - role: endpoints
        namespaces:
        names:
            - rook-ceph
```

The last step in the Prometheus alert manager configuration is to update a couple of Ceph dashboard settings:

- Get the alert manager URL:
```console
echo "http://$(kubectl get pod -l app=alertmanager -n rook-ceph -o jsonpath={.items[0].status.hostIP}):$(kubectl get service alertmanager -n rook-ceph  -o jsonpath='{.spec.ports[0].nodePort}')"
```
>```
>http://192.168.122.70:31000
>```
- Open a Ceph toolbox and configure the alert manager api host:

```console
ceph dashboard set-alertmanager-api-host 'http://192.168.122.70:31000'
```
>```
>Option ALERTMANAGER_API_HOST updated
>```
```console
ceph dashboard set-alertmanager-api-ssl-verify False

> >```

Reviewer: ![Screenshot from 2021-10-04 12-06-42](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/34444611/135804764-c75e2b71-d1bd-4fa5-9f92-40c93e3e5d9a.png)

Author: thx!

---

> title: Ceph Dashboard Monitoring

Reviewer 2: Or if there is overlap with the ceph-monitoring.md, maybe this content should be a new section in that doc.

> title: Ceph Dashboard Monitoring

Author: My first preference would be to keep this document separate, because it is long, with lot of things, and it is something not mandatory, so probably is adding complexity to the Ceph Dashboard document. However, I think that to include a link to this document in the original Ceph dashboard is interesting.

The OCP environment only needs Prometheus Operator to work, so seems sensible not to add in the Prometheus installation doc  all the stuff about the thing that need the dashboard in a pure k8s environment, but not in an OCP environment where all the elements are preinstalled.

indent: true
---
{% include_relative branch.liquid %}

## Ceph Dashboard Monitoring
Ceph clusters deployed using the Rook operator do not provide by default the software pieces needed to allow the Ceph Dashboard provide the monitoring and alerting functionalities. This document together with several resources files explains how to install and configure these pieces and the Ceph dashboard in order to provide the monitoring and alerting functionality. 

In first place is good to have a brief summary about what are the monitoring stack components we will need to install and configure.

1. [Prometheus operator](#prometheus-operator): it records real-time metrics in a time series database
2. [Prometheus Ceph manager module](#prometheus-ceph-manager-module): provides Ceph cluster metrics to Prometheus
3. [Grafana](#grafana): it will allow us to represent graphically the information collected by Prometheus
4. [Prometheus Node exporter](#prometheus-node-exporter): provides cluster nodes machine metrics to Prometheus
5. [Prometheus alert manager](#prometheus-alert-manager): manage alerts produced in Prometheus

## Prerequisites
- A working Ceph cluster deployed using the Rook operator.

> - [Prometheus manager module must be enabled](https://docs.ceph.com/en/latest/mgr/prometheus/#enabling-prometheus-output)

Author: Excellent idea

- [Dashboard must be enabled](ceph-dashboard.md#enable-the-ceph-dashboard) in the Ceph cluster CRD
- A PV with available space in order to store Grafana database (500Mb)

> - The files with the different resources definition and configuration. You can get them from the Rook repository:

Author: Done

```console
git clone --single-branch --branch {{ branchName }} https://github.com/rook/rook.git
cd rook/cluster/examples/kubernetes/ceph/monitoring
```
## Prometheus Operator
Follow the instructions provided in [Prometheus Monitoring](https://github.com/rook/rook/blob/{{ branchName }}/Documentation/ceph-monitoring.md)

The Prometheus operator allows you to set up a Prometheus instance in you kubernetes cluster, a summary of the commands you will need to execute is below:

Install the Prometheus Operator
```console

> kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/coreos/prometheus-operator/v0.40.0/bundle.yaml

Reviewer 2: Instead of linking a specific version of prometheus, how about we just link to the prometheus docs? 0.40.0 looks over a year old so we at least need to update our monitoring doc as well.

```
Go to the folder where the different resource files for the monitoring stack are stored
```console
cd rook/cluster/examples/kubernetes/ceph/monitoring
```

> Create and configure the Prometheus instance 

Reviewer 2: These steps are duplicated from ceph-monitoring.md? How can we consolidate?

Author: I wanted to provide a brief summary of the minimum things to do .. and let the user to get all the stuff from the same document without "jumping". I will clarify that with a previous comment.

Reviewer 2: What if we refer them to the other document as a prerequisite? This still seems like extra duplication.

kubectl create -f prometheus-service.yaml
```

With these steps you must have a running instance of Prometheus configured to scrape data from the Ceph cluster through the Ceph Prometheus manager module

To verify that prometheus is running you can try to access the prometheus instance.

Execute:
```console
echo "http://$(kubectl -n rook-ceph -o jsonpath={.status.hostIP} get pod prometheus-rook-prometheus-0):30900"
```
>```
>http://192.168.122.70:30900
>```
If you use the output URL in your browser, you should see the Prometheus monitoring website.

![Prometheus Monitoring Website](media/prometheus-monitor.png)

## Prometheus Ceph manager module
The source of the Ceph cluster metrics is this manager module, by default is enabled, and the Prometheus operator service monitor configures Prometheus to scrape data from it.

In order to avoid monitoring issues just verify that the scrape intervals are the same in Prometheus and in the Ceph manager module. Both intervals must be the same, depending on your monitoring needs, a value between 5 and 30 is correct.

In the Prometheus web UI, go to Status-Configuration, the scrape configuration should be like:

```yaml

> scrape_configs:

Reviewer 2: Can we just see the value with the `ceph config get` command below? If so, seems like we don't need to document this step.

Author: The "scrape configs" are part of the Prometheus configuration. Is not possible to get this information using a "ceph config get" command

- job_name: rook-ceph/rook-ceph-mgr/0
  honor_timestamps: true
  scrape_interval: 5s
```

To verify this value in the Ceph Manager module, open a [Rook toolbox](ceph-toolbox.md) and execute:
```console
ceph config get mgr mgr/prometheus/scrape_interval
```
>```
>30.000000
>```

If you have a different value (as you can see in this example), you can change it executing:
```console
ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/scrape_interval 5
```

## Grafana

> The Grafana image used is a customized image for Ceph. It is Grafana V.6.7.4, and it includes the set of Grafana dashboards used in the Ceph dashboard, and a couple of visualization plugins.

Reviewer 2: Only this exact version? Or we need at least v6.7.4?

Author: Yes, only the V6.7.4. Even it is more restrictive, because you cannot use a V6.7.4 standard version of the Grafana image, you need to use the Grafana Ceph customized image.
Is not clear in the text provided?

Execute:
```console
kubectl patch prometheus rook-prometheus -n rook-ceph --type merge --patch "$(cat alert-manager-patch.yaml)"
```

Verify that the Prometheus Configuration is set, accessing the Prometehus server UI, go to "Status-configuration" you should see the reference to the alert manager in the configuration file:

```yaml
alertmanagers:
- kubernetes_sd_configs:
      - role: endpoints
        namespaces:
        names:
            - rook-ceph
```

The last step in the Prometheus alert manager configuration is to update a couple of Ceph dashboard settings:

- Get the alert manager URL:
```console
echo "http://$(kubectl get pod -l app=alertmanager -n rook-ceph -o jsonpath={.items[0].status.hostIP}):$(kubectl get service alertmanager -n rook-ceph  -o jsonpath='{.spec.ports[0].nodePort}')"
```
>```
>http://192.168.122.70:31000
>```
- Open a Ceph toolbox and configure the alert manager api host:

```console
ceph dashboard set-alertmanager-api-host 'http://192.168.122.70:31000'
```
>```
>Option ALERTMANAGER_API_HOST updated
>```
```console
ceph dashboard set-alertmanager-api-ssl-verify False
```
>```
>Option ALERTMANAGER_API_SSL_VERIFY updated
>```

> Now if you open the Ceph dashboard and go to "cluster-monitoring" you should see:

Reviewer 2: This was quite a long doc. I know there are a lot of moving parts with prometheus, grafana, etc, but is there anything we can do to simplify this process?

Author: It is a long doc because i wanted to explain why we need each component, how to install it and how to verify if the installation is working.
We can reduce it heavily using only a one resource file with all the monitoring stack, and just explaining how to verify in the Ceph dashboard if everything is working.
If we would integrate this part into the operator (does not seem sensible) probably we can omit documentation, but in this case, i think that it is worth to explain with detail each step, and provide tools to the final user in order to customize and diagnose problems in the monitoring stack.

Reviewer 2: For now let's leave it separate from the operator, and have the documented steps. Agreed that it's not the right approach for now to implement this in the operator. 

If the steps are simple, more users are likely to complete the steps. So every step should be an action, and only minimal explanation. For example, if they want to learn more about prometheus or grafana, they would read those docs, rather than learn their details in Rook. It is a difficult balance between providing too much or too little explanation, but simple is always the goal.

Author: Agree with you .. simple things are the best things. I think we have now in the document the minimum instructions to do the job. The problem is that the job is involves lot of things, so it is going to be difficult to reduce documentation.... completely opened to any simplification....

---
title: Ceph Dashboard Monitoring

> weight: 2500

Reviewer 2: This value will put it after the monitoring topic in the TOC.
```suggestion
weight: 2510
```

## Production systems considerations

The documentation provided is intended to explain how to provide the monitoring and alerting capabilities to the Ceph Dashboard. This is not replacing the original procedures/documentation that are needed to install the whole 
monitoring stack in a kubernetes production system. Security, High availability, Multi Tenancy aspects are not in the scope of this document and those topics must be managed following the recommendations/documentation of each monitoring stack component.

The monitoring stack installed in a Kubernetes production system is a separate functional component that provides a service not only to Ceph, but also to other applications. After the monitoring stack is configured, enabling monitoring and alerting in the Ceph Dashboard requires only two simple steps:

1. Enable dashboard, prometheus manager module and monitoring in the [Ceph cluster CR](#ceph-cluster).
2. Use the [Rook toolbox](ceph-toolbox.md) to set the urls used by the different monitoring stack components, and to disable (_set-*-api-ssl-verify settings_) the ssl certificates verification if self signed certificates are used. 
```console

> ceph dashboard set-grafana-api-url <grafana_url>

Reviewer 2: Where can the three urls be found to set in these commands? In the later sections of this doc? Seems like the specific commands should not be in this section since they need to read the later section to get the urls.

ceph dashboard set-grafana-api-ssl-verify <False|True>
ceph dashboard set-alertmanager-api-host <alert manager url>
ceph dashboard set-alertmanager-api-ssl-verify <False|True>
ceph dashboard set-prometheus-api-host <prometheus url>
ceph dashboard set-prometheus-api-ssl-verify <False|True>
```

## Preparation

Clone the Rook repository to have access to the different resource files used in the next steps:
```console
git clone --single-branch --branch {{ branchName }} https://github.com/rook/rook.git

> cd rook/cluster/examples/kubernetes/ceph/monitoring

Reviewer 2: This folder changed in v1.8
```suggestion
cd rook/deploy/examples/monitoring
```

```

## Ceph Cluster

Dashboard, prometheus manager modules and Prometheus monitoring must be enabled in your cluster CR:
```yaml
mgr:
...
  modules:
    ...
  - name: prometheus
    enabled: true
...
dashboard:
  enabled: true
  ssl: true
...
monitoring:
  enabled: true
  rulesNamespace: rook-ceph  
```

## Prometheus Operator

> The Prometheus operator allows you to set up a Prometheus instance in you kubernetes cluster. Follow the instructions provided in [Prometheus Monitoring](https://github.com/rook/rook/blob/master/Documentation/ceph-monitoring.md).

Reviewer 2: Links to other rook docs don't need a full url or path
```suggestion
The Prometheus operator allows you to set up a Prometheus instance in you kubernetes cluster. Follow the instructions provided in [Prometheus Monitoring](ceph-monitoring.md).
```

```yaml
scrape_configs:
- job_name: rook-ceph/rook-ceph-mgr/0
  honor_timestamps: true
  scrape_interval: 5s
```

To verify this value in the Ceph Manager module, open a [Rook toolbox](ceph-toolbox.md) and execute:
```console
ceph config get mgr mgr/prometheus/scrape_interval
```
>```
>30.000000
>```

If you have a different value (as you can see in this example), you can change it executing:
```console
ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/scrape_interval 5
```

## Grafana

The Grafana image used is a _customized_ image of Grafana V.6.7.4, and it includes the set of Grafana dashboards used in the Ceph dashboard, and a couple of visualization plugins.

In order to deploy Grafana properly configured for Ceph, we will use the grafana.yaml file stored in the monitoring folder. Some modifications in this file could be needed: 

**1. Change of SSL certificates (optional)**

The grafana.yaml file includes a configmap for the SSL certificates used to enable secure access to the UI. These certificates are self-signed and if it is needed or preferred can be replaced by others.

**2. Grafana storage (mandatory)**

> Grafana needs storage for its database and other stuff. The "grafana.yaml" file provided uses a PVC that get the storage from a PV based in a Storage Class with name "ceph-storage". _The user must be sure that a PV using this storage class is available for the grafana PVC_. Or change the storage class used in the grafana PVC to point the right one for your cluster. 

Reviewer 2: The PVs are expected to be dynamically provisioned with the csi driver. Why would there be a PV already available? The PVC will just request it to be created.

Verify you have a PV with enough space(at least 500Mb) available for the Grafana PVC:
```console
kubectl get pv
```
>```
>NAME              CAPACITY   ACCESS MODES   RECLAIM POLICY   STATUS      CLAIM   STORAGECLASS   REASON   AGE
>ceph-pv-grafana   9Gi        RWO            Retain           Available           ceph-storage            5s
>```

_**Note about High Availability:**

> If you use a storage class that provides "high availability storage" (for example using a [Ceph shared filesystem](ceph-filesystem-md)), the Grafana installation can be also high available. Just is needed label more than 1 node with the label "app=grafana" and set the number of replicas to the desired number in the grafana.yaml file._

Reviewer 2: Rook always recommends replica 3 for production pools. Seems like we don't need to mention this for high availability since Rook pools should already be configured as such.

---
title: Ceph Dashboard Monitoring
weight: 2500
indent: true
---
{% include_relative branch.liquid %}

## Ceph Dashboard Monitoring

To enable monitoring and alerting functionality for the Ceph dashboard, additional steps are required to install the required dependencies.

The monitoring stack components required include:

1. [Prometheus operator](#prometheus-operator): records real-time metrics in a time series database
2. [Prometheus Ceph manager module](#prometheus-ceph-manager-module): provide Ceph cluster metrics to Prometheus
3. [Grafana](#grafana): displays charts for the information collected by Prometheus
4. [Prometheus Node exporter](#prometheus-node-exporter): provides cluster nodes machine metrics to Prometheus
5. [Prometheus alert manager](#prometheus-alert-manager): manage alerts produced in Prometheus

## Production systems considerations

> The documentation provided is intended to explain how to provide the monitoring and alerting capabilities to the Ceph Dashboard. This not is replacing in any way the original procedures/documentation that are needed to install the whole 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The documentation provided is intended to explain how to provide the monitoring and alerting capabilities to the Ceph Dashboard. This is not replacing the original procedures/documentation that are needed to install the whole 
```

monitoring stack in a kubernetes production system. Security, High availability, Multi Tenancy aspects are not in the scope of this document and those topics must be managed following the recommendations/documentation of each monitoring stack component.

Usually the monitoring stack installed in a Kubernetes production system is a complete separate functional component that provides service not only to Ceph, but also to other applications. if that is the case, then the enablement of  the monitoring and alerting functionality in the Ceph Dashboard is reduced only to two simple steps:

> 1. Enable dashboard, prometheus manager module and monitoring in the [Ceph cluster CRD](#ceph-cluster).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Enable dashboard, prometheus manager module and monitoring in the [CephCluster CR](#ceph-cluster).
```

2. Use the [Rook toolbox](ceph-toolbox.md) to set the urls used by the different monitoring stack components, and to disable (_set-*-api-ssl-verify settings_) the ssl certificates verification if self signed certificates are used. 
```console
ceph dashboard set-grafana-api-url <grafana_url>
ceph dashboard set-grafana-api-ssl-verify <False|True>
ceph dashboard set-alertmanager-api-host <alert manager url>
ceph dashboard set-alertmanager-api-ssl-verify <False|True>
ceph dashboard set-prometheus-api-host <prometheus url>
ceph dashboard set-prometheus-api-ssl-verify <False|True>
```

## Preparation

Clone the Rook repository to have access to the different resource files used in the next steps:
```console
git clone --single-branch --branch {{ branchName }} https://github.com/rook/rook.git
cd rook/cluster/examples/kubernetes/ceph/monitoring
```

## Ceph Cluster

> Dashboard, prometheus manager modules and Prometheus monitoring must be enabled in your cluster CRD:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The dashboard, prometheus manager modules and Prometheus monitoring must be enabled in your cluster CR:
```

```yaml
mgr:
...
  modules:
    ...
  - name: prometheus
    enabled: true
...
dashboard:
  enabled: true
  ssl: true
...
monitoring:
  enabled: true
  rulesNamespace: rook-ceph  
```

> ## Prometheus Operator

Reviewer 2: Does prometheus need to be installed before the ceph dashboard configured? Or the order is not important?

Author: Not important, really the ceph dashboard get the information from prometheus Through Grafana

The Prometheus operator allows you to set up a Prometheus instance in you kubernetes cluster. Follow the instructions provided in [Prometheus Monitoring](https://github.com/rook/rook/blob/{{ branchName }}/Documentation/ceph-monitoring.md).

Below a brief summary of the things you need to do:

[Install the Prometheus Operator](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator#quickstart)

Go to the folder where the different resource files for the monitoring stack are stored
```console

> cd rook/cluster/examples/kubernetes/ceph/monitoring

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
cd cluster/examples/kubernetes/ceph/monitoring
```

```
Create and configure the Prometheus instance 
```console
kubectl create -f service-monitor.yaml
kubectl create -f prometheus.yaml
kubectl create -f prometheus-service.yaml
```

With these steps you must have a running instance of Prometheus configured to scrape data from the Ceph cluster through the Ceph Prometheus manager module

To verify that prometheus is running you can try to access the prometheus instance.

Execute:
```console
echo "http://$(kubectl -n rook-ceph -o jsonpath={.status.hostIP} get pod prometheus-rook-prometheus-0):30900"
```
>```
>http://192.168.122.70:30900
>```
If you use the output URL in your browser, you should see the Prometheus monitoring website.

![Prometheus Monitoring Website](media/prometheus-monitor.png)

## Prometheus Ceph manager module

The source of the Ceph cluster metrics is this manager module, by default is enabled, and the Prometheus operator service monitor configures Prometheus to scrape data from it.

> In order to avoid monitoring issues just verify that the scrape intervals are the same in Prometheus and in the Ceph manager module. Both intervals must be the same, depending on your monitoring needs, a value between 5 and 30 is correct.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to avoid monitoring issues just verify that the scrape intervals are the same in Prometheus and in the Ceph manager module. Both intervals must be the same. Depending on your monitoring needs, a value between 5 and 30 is correct.
```

> In the Prometheus web UI, go to Status-Configuration, the scrape configuration should be like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the Prometheus web UI, go to Status-Configuration. The scrape configuration should be the following:
```

```yaml
scrape_configs:
- job_name: rook-ceph/rook-ceph-mgr/0
  honor_timestamps: true
  scrape_interval: 5s
```

To verify this value in the Ceph Manager module, open a [Rook toolbox](ceph-toolbox.md) and execute:
```console
ceph config get mgr mgr/prometheus/scrape_interval
```
>```
>30.000000
>```

If you have a different value (as you can see in this example), you can change it executing:
```console
ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/scrape_interval 5
```

## Grafana

The Grafana image used is a _customized_ image of Grafana V.6.7.4, and it includes the set of Grafana dashboards used in the Ceph dashboard, and a couple of visualization plugins.

In order to deploy Grafana properly configured for Ceph, we will use the grafana.yaml file stored in the monitoring folder. Some modifications in this file could be needed: 

**1. Change of SSL certificates (optional)**

The grafana.yaml file includes a configmap for the SSL certificates used to enable secure access to the UI. These certificates are self-signed and if it is needed or preferred can be replaced by others.

**2. Grafana storage (mandatory)**

> Grafana needs storage to save database and other stuff. The "grafana.yaml" file provided uses a PVC that get the storage from a PV based in a Storage Class with name "ceph-storage". _The user must be sure that a PV using this storage class is available for the grafana PVC_. Or change the storage class used in the grafana PVC to point the right one for your cluster. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Grafana needs storage for its database. The "grafana.yaml" file provided uses a PVC that get the storage from a PV based in a Storage Class with name "ceph-storage". _The user must be sure that a PV using this storage class is available for the grafana PVC_. Or change the storage class used in the grafana PVC to point the right one for your cluster. 
```
